# Persistence-of-Memory
Code for replication of Persistence of Memory: Lifespan Dynamics of the Human Antiviral Antibody Reactome, Mitchell et al.

## Overview 
This repository contains all code required to reproduce figures and analysis in "Persistence of Memory: Lifespan Dynamics of the Human Antiviral Antibody Reactome" by Mitchell et al.

## System Requirements
### Hardware requirements
All code in this repository can be executed on a standard computer with sufficient RAM or in a high performance computing environment. Outputs of scripts that are particularly RAM-intensive or have long run-times have also been pre-computed and stored in /Intermediate Files Used in Plots/

### Software requirements
#### OS Requirements
This code has been tested on macOS (Sonoma 14.6) and Windows and Linux (Ubuntu 25.10)

#### R version
All data analysis was performed in R (version 4.4.0).

#### R dependencies
The following packages are dependencies for code included in this repository:
broom (version 1.0.7), cluster (version 2.1.6), ComplexUpset (version 1.3.3), cowplot (version 1.1.3), cutpointr (version 1.2.0), data.table (version 1.15.4), dplyr (version 1.1.4), emmeans (version 1.11.2-8), forcats (version 1.0.0), ggplot2 (version 3.5.1), ggplotify (version 0.1.2), ggraph (version 2.2.2), ggpubr (version 0.6.0), grid (version 4.4.0), igraph (version 2.2.2), lme4 (version 1.1-35.3), patchwork (version 1.3.0), pheatmap (version 1.0.12), plotROC (version 2.3.1), pROC (version 1.18.5), purrr (version 1.0.4), readr (version 2.1.5), readxl (version 1.4.3), splines (version 4.4.0), stringi (version 1.8.4), stringr (version 1.5.1), tibble (version 3.2.1), tidyr (version 1.3.1), tidytext (version 0.4.3), UpSetR (version 1.4.0), uwot (version 0.2.4), gtable(version 0.3.6), here (version 1.0.1), vegan (version 2.7-2). 

## Installation Guide

### Downloading the repository

Clone the repository using Git:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/moriahm7942/Persistence-of-Memory.git
cd Persistence-of-Memory
```

Alternatively, the repository can be downloaded as a ZIP archive directly from GitHub.

### Installing required packages

Open R (version 4.4.0 or later) and install any missing package dependencies. All required packages and tested versions are listed above under **R dependencies**.

### Downloading data files

The data required to reproduce the analyses are available through the Supplementary Materials of the Manuscript. Download all data files and place them in the `/Supplemental Tables/` directory.


### Running the code

All figures and analyses can be reproduced by executing the R Markdown (`.Rmd`) documents in:

```text
/Figure_Code/
```

Each document uses here::here() to identify the root of the cloned repository, so users do not need to manually edit file paths. Each document loads the required packages and data automatically. Some figure notebooks load intermediate files generated by scripts contained in:

```text
/Functions and General Analysis Code/
```
and saved in  
```text
/Intermediate Files Used in Plots/
```

When intermediate files are required, this dependency is indicated within the corresponding figure notebook. 

### Expected installation time

Repository download, package installation, and data download should require approximately 10–30 minutes on a standard desktop computer with a stable internet connection.

## Demonstration
All figures can be reproduced by executing the Rmd documents in /Figure_Code/ Each document will load required packages and data when executed. Some of these documents load intermediate files from /Intermediate Files Used in Plots/ that were generated in scripts contained in /Functions and General Analysis Code/ When this occurs, it is indicated in the R markdown document. 

### Immunoprint Demonstration

Immunoprint can be executed as follows. On a data set of this size, expected run time is less than five minutes.

```r
library(readr)
library(dplyr)
library(here)

# Define paths relative to the root of the cloned repository
directory_path <- here::here()
folder_path <- paste0(directory_path, "/Supplemental Tables/")
folder_path_code <- paste0(directory_path, "/Functions and General Analysis Code/")

# Load Immunoprint function
source(paste0(folder_path_code, "Immunoprint functions.R"))

# Load data
combined_metadata_dist <- read_csv(paste0(folder_path, "Data Table S1.csv"))
all_zs_combined <- read_csv(paste0(folder_path, "Data Table S2.csv"))
Viral_Annotations <- read_csv(paste0(folder_path, "Data Table S4.csv"))

# Filter to Immunoprint validation dataset and divide samples into two partitions
Imm_Val_Metadata <- combined_metadata_dist %>%
  filter(imm_val == TRUE)

database_samps <- Imm_Val_Metadata %>%
  distinct(identifier) %>%
  sample_frac(2/3) %>%
  pull(identifier)

new_samps <- Imm_Val_Metadata %>%
  distinct(identifier) %>%
  filter(!identifier %in% database_samps) %>%
  pull(identifier)

# Execute Immunoprint
# USAGE: immunoprint(Z_frame1, Z_frame2, prev, keepAll)
# Z_frame1 and Z_frame2 are data frames with an "id" column containing peptide ids;
# all other columns contain epitope binding signals for samples indicated by column name.
# prev must contain an "id" column and a public_epitope_2015 column.
# keepAll = TRUE returns Immunoprint scores for all pairwise comparisons.
immunoprint(
  all_zs_combined %>% select(id, all_of(new_samps)),
  all_zs_combined %>% select(id, all_of(database_samps)),
  Viral_Annotations,
  keepAll = TRUE
)
```

The `immunoprint_match` column indicates whether samples were predicted to be from the same donor (`TRUE`) or not (`FALSE`). `Score` indicates the value of the Immunoprint score.
